Efficiency Mapping: Cost-Optimal Microservice
Configuration via Iterative LLM-Guided Stress Testing
Abstract
While microservices offer scalability, cloud environments
often suffer from significant over-provisioning due to the
difficulty of predicting performance under specific work-
loads. This paper proposes a closed-loop, LLM-driven
methodology to identify the ”Efficiency Frontier” for mi-
croservice deployments. By subjecting a service to a tar-
get workload (e.g., 1000 RPS) and iteratively reducing
resource allocations from a safe baseline, we utilize Large
Language Models (LLMs) to analyze system telemetry
and propose progressively leaner configurations. The ob-
jective is to discover the minimum resource footprint that
maintains Service Level Objectives (SLOs), effectively
mapping the most cost-effective configuration for a given
traffic intensity.
3. Resource Reduction: The LLM generates a leaner
YAML configuration (HPA/Deployment).
4. Validation: The new configuration is applied, and
the workload is re-run.
5. Termination: The loop terminates when an SLO
violation (e.g., p95 latency > 500ms) occurs. The
configuration from the previous successful run is
identified as the optimal state.
1 Introduction
Operating microservice-based systems is cost-intensive
because performance boundaries are non-linear. To
avoid on-call incidents, SREs frequently over-provision
resources, leading to ”slack” where CPU and memory re-
main unutilized. Traditional autoscaling (HPA) addresses
traffic spikes but does not necessarily optimize for the
most cost-efficient base configuration.
We propose a ”Stress-to-Optimize” workflow. Instead
of reacting to failures, we proactive hunt for the breaking
point of a specific workload. By starting with a known-
safe, high-resource configuration and iteratively ”squeez-
ing” the resources in a closed validation loop, we can
identify the exact point where cost-efficiency meets per-
formance stability.
3 Problem Formulation
We define the optimization task as finding the configura-
tion C that minimizes total resource cost while satisfying
performance constraints for a fixed arrival rate λ.
3.1 The Objective Function
Let Cost(C) be the aggregate cost of replicas N, CPU
requests Rcpu, and Memory requests Rmem:
Minimize F(C) = N ×(w1Rcpu + w2Rmem) (1)
subject to:
Lp95 ≤LSLO and Erate ≤ESLO (2)
3.2 Inputs and Observables
The system consumes a Stress Test Record containing:
• Static Params: Nmin,Nmax, CPU/Mem Limits.
• Workload: Fixed λ (e.g., 1000 requests/sec).
• Observables: ρcpu (utilization-to-limit ratio),
ρmem, and Lp95 latency.
2 Methodology: The Iterative
Squeeze
The framework operates as a closed-loop controller con-
sisting of a Load Generator (k6), a Telemetry Collector
(Prometheus), and a Decision Engine (LLM).
The process follows an N-step iterative scale-down:
1. Baseline Run: Execute the target workload against
a generous, over-provisioned configuration.
2. Slack Analysis: The LLM evaluates the gap be-
tween observed utilization and allocated limits.
4 LLM-Guided Optimization
For each iteration, the LLM acts as a heuristic optimizer.
It is provided with the JSON record of the current run
and asked to identify ”Optimization Headroom.”
Listing 1: Optimized Stress-Test Record JSON
1 {
2 " r un _ in de x ": 4 ,
3 " config ": {
4 " c p u _ r e q u e s t _ m ": 200 ,
1
8 " a c h i e v e d _ r p s ": 5 " r e p l i c a s _ m i n ": 5
6 } ,
7 " observed ": {
10 11 12 13 14 15 }
1000 ,
9 " l a t e n c y _ m s ": {" p95 ": 210} ,
" c p u _ u t i l _ p c t ": 45 ,
" s l o _ s t a t u s ": " PASS "
} ,
" o p t i m i z a t i o n _ p o t e n t i a l ": " HIGH " ,
" r e c o m m e n d a t i o n ": " Reduce replicas to 4 or CPU to 150
m "
Unlike reactive mitigation, the LLM here is prompted
with a Cost Archetype (e.g., OVER PROVISIONED). If the
Lp95 is significantly lower than LSLO and ρcpu is low, the
LLM must propose a reduction.
5 Architecture
The pipeline utilizes an orchestrator to manage the life-
cycle of a test. It triggers the k6 load profile, queries
Prometheus for the 60-second observation window, and
feeds the resulting JSON to the LLM. If the LLM pro-
duces a recommendation and the current run is successful,
the orchestrator applies the new YAML and triggers the
next iteration.
6 Conclusion
By pivoting from failure analysis to cost-optimization, we
provide a quantifiable method for right-sizing microser-
vices. This approach identifies not just why a system
fails, but exactly how much it costs to keep it successful.
2